you can sign up for
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
lisa feldman barrett the neuroscientist
who's written multiple books that have
been really revolutionary in the way
that i think about the brain and so i'm
very excited to welcome you to the show
it's my pleasure to be here tom thanks
so much for having me on
absolutely no this is going to be a lot
of fun i was saying before we started
rolling that um
you're i have a working model of how the
brain works that has been tremendously
useful to me in my life um and your
books come in and just sort of knock
that all around and say you know you're
really thinking about this in the wrong
way um and i wanted to start with a
quote um this is this isn't from your
latest book seven and a half lessons
about the brain but it really gets to
the heart of what i find so intriguing
about the book and this is you talking
in an interview you said not all people
in all cultures have emotions everybody
has affect assuming they have a
neurotypical brain but they don't all
have emotions and i was like say what
uh i'd love for you to
talk through the difference between an
emotion and an affect and how it is
humanly possible that some people don't
have quote unquote emotions
sure i'm really happy to do that um
so
just before i start though i should say
you know one of the most cherished
distinctions in western civilization is
the difference between a thought and a
feeling
so
um this is something that seems so
it seems so obvious to us that
people wouldn't even ask whether that's
something that's generally
experienced around the world but
actually there are many cultures around
the world that don't make that
distinction at all
so in those cultures there's experience
but thinking and feeling are not
separate experiences and they're
certainly not separate experiences that
struggle for control of your behavior
that's a really western view
um
and so
um you know i think it's really
important to ask questions like as many
do like what is what is generally true
about the human brain
um so that all humans are endowed you
know with certain capabilities versus
what is um what is learned and this is
the general nature versus nurture kind
of question i think it's really really
important to understand that
you know we have the kind of nature that
requires nurture
meaning we have the kind of genes that
build
um
that give us a general brain plan
and babies are born with that brain plan
but they're basically born with brains
that are under construction
and they learn
their the wiring instructions really
come from the world
and from their own bodies
um and um from the social world
and so uh in cultures that ha don't make
sense of sensations
in terms of emotion versus cognition or
thoughts versus feelings
those people have different other
experiences that we don't have and that
really are hard for us to
wrap our heads around just like when you
listen to a language that you don't know
you you just hear noise you don't really
hear words um it's sort of a something
similar to that
um but to answer your question
so
um
i like to start with
what's your brain's most important job
your brain's most important job is not
thinking
it's not feeling it's not seeing
it's not hearing it's to run
your body
um so you have a body filled with uh
systems for breathing for um you know
circulating blood for getting rid of
waste um and so on and so forth for
protecting you from from viruses
um
and
all the cells in your body require
glucose
oxygen water salt lots and lots and lots
of nutrients and so
your brain's job is to run that is to
run your the systems of your body in a
in a metabolically efficient way
and that's true of all brains
and some scientists think that's why
brains evolved or at least one of the
really important reasons why brain's
involved as bodies got bigger over
evolutionary time brains
were needed and also got bigger
so as your body
and your brain so you as your brain is
regulating your body your body is
sending sense data back to your brain
so you can think of it as a constant
conversation actually between your brain
and your body that's happening in the
world
and
you know we're not really wired to
feel those
sense data very directly
um so think about it you know you right
now for example you are
we're talking to each other and we're
looks like we're just calmly you know
listening to each other
but actually inside your body is a whole
drama going on that you are largely
unaware of
and that's a really good thing because
if you were aware of it you would never
pay attention to anything outside your
own skin ever again so just think about
the last time you had a stomach ache for
example or you had constipation or
something wrong with your gi tract you
know like
philosophers call this tragic embodiment
this um
the fact that we're really largely
unaware of what's going on inside our
own bodies
but when we become aware man
all our attention goes there
and we can't you know so think about the
last time you sort of cut your finger or
you know you just you all your attention
goes to your body
so
that doesn't usually happen for us
and so
how are we supposed to keep track of
whether things are generally copacetic
or or where there's a problem there
um and so what evolution has given us
is a workaround it's given us
really simple feelings
like feeling pleasant feeling unpleasant
feeling worked up feeling calm feeling
comfortable feeling uncomfortable these
really general feelings
come from
the brain's regulation of the body and
the body's um
sense data sending sense data back to
the brain so these general feelings come
from this constant conversation between
the brain and the body
and those feelings
are sometimes really intense
so when everything is pretty good you
can feel pretty great and when
everything when you're when there's a
problem with your brain's regulation of
your body or let's say your your brain
is
directing your body to spend a lot of
energy
you can feel pretty crappy actually
and that signal it's kind of like a
general barometer for generally speaking
how are things going
it doesn't really tell you
what to do
about the situation it just tells you
are things going okay are things going
not okay um you know um
and
those feelings are with you always from
the moment that you're born until the
moment that you die
they are not emotions they're what
people call mood
or
what scientists call affect
so
mood or or affect
is with you all the time whether you're
emotional or not and sometimes we
experience the affect as our own
reactions to things
like um i like you or i like that drink
or
that's i really like that painting and
sometimes we experience affect as a
property of the thing itself like
that guy's an
that's a really beautiful painting
that's a really delicious drink
so it's always with us but sometimes
affect is in the foreground of our
attention
and sometimes it's in the background and
we just treat it like it's a property of
the thing it's like the thing that we're
interacting with
so as i said you know you don't
effect just tells you whether things are
generally okay with your the systems in
your body or whether there's your your
brain is um
having trouble regulating your body or
whether there's some deficit in the
energy regulation in your body
and um
[Music]
it doesn't really give you any more
specific information about what to do
about that situation
um
your brain pretty much has to guess at
the causes
as i'm sure we'll discuss later
and some of those guesses are emotions
so basically when your brain makes an
emotion what it's doing
is it's
making sense of what's going on inside
your body
in relation to what's going on around
you in the world meaning that your brain
is actively applying meaning to
how you feel in this particular context
exactly so the way to think about it is
something like this like
your brain
your brain is stuck in a dark silent box
called your skull
your whole life
right
and it's receiving sense data
through your sense organs through your
eyes through your ears through your nose
and so on
and it's also receiving sense data from
your body
these sense data the changes in in light
and in air pressure and you know tugs
and so on from your body aches and
whatever
these are outcomes of some set of causes
they're the effects of some set of
causes so when you hear a loud bang what
is that bang
is it did somebody drop something on the
ground did a door slam did somebody hit
your car
is it a gunshot you know what is it what
was that bang similarly when you have a
tug in your chest
are you anxious are you having trouble
breathing is that the beginning of a
heart attack
are you just feeling a moment really
poignantly
um what what is it what caused it your
brain
stuck in your skull doesn't know
anything
about the causes it only is receiving
the outcome so it has to guess at the
causes this is how low fidelity
sorry
say that and then i'll ask the question
i'm just gonna say this is called a
reverse inference problem
um or or an inverse inference problem
and so
your brain has to guess and it's and it
is guessing it's guessing using your
past experience so it's guessing what
those sensations mean in this situation
by referring to past experiences that
were similar in some way
so
the
brain's trapped in a box it doesn't
actually know what's going on it's not
even necessarily as a device created to
be objective it's just trying to keep
you alive long enough to have children
that have children
and
what i'm curious about is
are the signals coming to the brain
quite low fidelity in that when people
think of emotion
you think of this
rich emotional life where you get swept
off your feet by love you get overcome
with rage where you actually feel
capable of more than you did
a minute prior like when i think about
the intoxicant that is righteous
indignation when you feel this just i am
right to pursue this thing it actually
makes me more bold like it it steps me
into a mini personality that acts
differently than i would without that
so when when i first read that idea that
there are cultures without emotion and
then hearing the explanation that you
just give that it's maybe um
i'll be interested to get your take on
whether that's semantics and it's we're
sort of all going through the same thing
if you get a low resolution thing
pitched up to you your brain's job is in
context to say this means this
my what i am is a prediction machine and
therefore based on this in this context
feel this way
and now i'm stepping outside of what
i've heard you say into sort of what i
think of as my own experience and now in
this context you move into sort of this
micro personality and you act in
accordance with you know whether it's to
be aggressive whether it's to be demure
um to be a diplomat you know whatever
you sort of based on historical
experiences you think is right for that
moment but my real question is about the
level of fidelity of what the body is
coughing up is it is it giving you four
or five sort of blunt instruments in
everything else's context
so
there are many many many interesting
things in what you just said
um i'll answer your question but then i
want to come back to this issue of is it
just semantics because that's like one
of my most favorite questions in the
whole world so um
uh
it so what's the fidelity well
what what your brain is doing with the
sense data from your body it's doing
with all the sense data it's receiving
from the world so the sense data that it
receives from the world is always
ambiguous
noisy
and um
partial
but even in those cases visual
information is very high fidelity
that's why you see
with hot in high dimensionality you you
know you can see a lot of detail you can
see things very sharply um for the most
part i mean if you if your neurotypical
brain and your eyes are working properly
and so on um
auditory information
also pretty high fidelity
touch
also pretty high fidelity actually and
um
what's interesting is your distance
senses that is things that allow you to
sense at a distance far from your body
so that's vision audition to some extent
um
and um touch because touch evolved in
the water and in the water somatosensory
touch is a distant sense interestingly
yeah it lets you know whether something
is close to you or far away from you
um by vibration
um
all high fidelity very high fidelity
actually and for touch it's really
interesting because certain parts of
your body have much more high fidelity
than others so
um like the uh your arm
you know you can localize you can
localize pretty well when somebody when
something touches you in fact you don't
even have sensors for water in your skin
at all because we evolved in the water
right so we don't have sense we don't
have senses for in our skin for water
that just wouldn't make any sense um but
nonetheless you can feel the tiniest
drop of water on your skin when it's
about to rain right so
um but certain parts of our brains have
much certain parts of our body have much
more high fidelity like lips
finger hands fingers genitals
um and then certain parts less like you
know the tip of your on your leg or you
know on your arm or what have you
the data from your body
[Music]
um inside your body
it's debatable how high fidelity it is
and and when i say it's debatable what i
mean is that scientists are debating
this actually we're all we're trying to
figure out that figure that out it seems
like the information from your gut from
the internal
parts of your gut i mean you have cells
inside your intestines that signal
all the way up to your brain
about nutrient levels like all the time
so those seem to be pretty high fidelity
you have um what are called ergo
receptors which are just like little
receptors in your muscles that that
indicate to the brain how much glucose
is being burned for example those seem
it's not clear whether they're high
fidelity or not but they seem
it's not so important to know like
whether glucose in a particular muscle
cell is being burned what's generally
important is like
you know in general how much is the
muscle working right it's not usually we
don't need to know it's like specific
but maybe it's more specific for the
purposes of blood flow we just don't we
just don't really know what is known
is that
unlike vision and audition and touch
somatosensory touch outside your body
the information is carried up to the
brain
um
along very
neurons that have very thick axons
and very thick dendrites so like these
are
neurons that are
you could think of the information as
being carried along very
kind of robust axons with very lots of
myelin so lots of so i mean i don't know
how much your audience knows about like
how what a neuron looks like or what
have you so that's why
it's come up a fair amount so you can go
relatively deep and people will have a
rough idea i've given them the layman's
description so
i'm sure the things they've heard me say
over and over which are some of the
things i want to get into
are wrong
uh and that yeah a little revelatory
truth will go a long way so i'll just
say that that distant senses are carried
that that information is carried to the
brain on axon on neurons that have axons
which are very thick and and they're
very myelinated and they they fire very
fast as a consequence they're also very
expensive
the information that's being sent
metabolically expensive yeah the
information that's being sent to the
brain from the internal um systems of
your body is being sent along
really
small axons that are not myelinated or
are lightly myelinated and what that
means is that the actually for the
unmyelinated neurons
the axons can talk to each other as the
information is going up to your brain
so there's actually a lot of information
sharing
that's going on between the act between
different neurons as it's reaching the
brain and scientists are still trying to
figure out whether
does that improve the fidelity of the
information or does it delude it
it's just not so i
i the general consensus
i would say is that it's
you're not the the information from your
body is not
not that high fidelity
but i'm i'm giving this big caveat
because
we don't experience it as high fidelity
you and i do not experience it when you
have an ache in your gut you don't
experience it like you don't know where
in your intestine the problem is i mean
think about people who have appendicitis
right usually what happens is your whole
abdomen
is very sore and it's only right before
the appendix bursts that you feel very
very specifically where the pain is so
it's not really clear
and that's part of the tricky bit is to
know how do you know whether
some tension in your chest is
anxiety or difficulty breathing or the
beginnings of a heart attack
you you can't know your brain actually
is just guessing it's guessing based on
everything it's learned from your past
experiences from what you've watched in
movies from the books you've read from
the people that you've talked to it's
making a guess and it's always making a
guess
and so the question that you asked about
um
you know well how could it be that
people don't have emotions is this just
really semantic i guess what i would say
is the following
first of all when people say is it just
semantic i just love that phrasing
because
what is semantics it's meaning is it
just meaning
everything is just meaning i mean like i
you know that's not like that's not
trivial that's like see you know
i think when people say that though and
certainly myself what i'm getting at is
is it trivia is it just descriptive it's
like right are we using different words
for the same thing essentially yeah no
we're not no we're not so let me just
let me just say that um
that uh
when your brain is making meaning of
something when your brain has to guess
at what the meaning is of something
i just want to unpack what that what
that what we think that looks like in
the brain and then you'll see why i'm
saying it's not just cement it's not
just semantic in the way that you mean
it
so
if we were to
stop time right now
your brain would be have taken an
accounting of what's going on in the
world right now and what's going on
inside your own body and based on your
past experiences
it's going to make a guess
about what's going to happen next
a prediction
what is that prediction
well the first thing that prediction is
is a plan for action
the first thing that your brain does to
make a prediction it's not like
forecasting
you know some event it's forecasting
what changes inside the body have to
happen to allow certain actions to
happen so it's actually an action plan
immediately your brain is into an action
plan and then based on the based on a
lot of evidence actually from anatomy
and from signal processing and from you
know brain imaging and from observing
you know single cells fire and rat
brains and so on all this evidence what
we can say is that your brain makes a
a plan first for action so changes
inside the body to support actual
movement
and the consequence of those
are
sensory predictions or what are called
perceptual inferences that prepare your
body to see and hear and feel
something in the next moment
so
meaning differences are it's not like
your brain is evaluating the meaning of
something and then prepares you to act
the preparation for action is the
meaning
that's the meaning of those sensory
signals from the brain's point of view
and what you experience is a consequence
of your actions it's not the other way
around it's not like you experience
something and then you act it's that
based on how things are now your brain
predicts how you should act and then it
predicts well what are you likely to
experience
based on that action in this situation
the last time it happened so what does
that mean what it means is that if you
live in a culture
where
things are just use an example from the
book
where things are um
uncertain
you're not able to predict really well
and your life might be at stake because
of it
you will go to sleep
and there you go
that's what you teach your children to
do when they're afraid
that is what it means to be afraid you
fall asleep and interestingly enough if
you look in the animal world you can see
that there is this
um what's called brachycardia which is a
slowing of the heart because think now
think in the ocean in the ocean right
um what do you do when there's a
predator around
like a shark who can detect
your heartbeats if you're a fish
you slow your heartbeat you slow
everything down
and you just if you remain still
and you slow your heart
the shark
can't find you
so you
sink and you know if you sink in down to
the you know or you sink behind a plant
or whatever and you just
are still
and silent
not with your heart beating wildly with
it calmed and slow
the shark will pass you by and in fact
there's a really great um netflix
documentary right now called
um
my octopus teacher which i think is
everybody should watch it's an amazing
movie but you see this little octopus
have you seen it yeah
yeah it's amazing you see this little
octopus she does this at in certain
points she like she just she's hiding
and she she looks like she's falling
asleep and that's actually what animals
sometimes do so
even though falling asleep during fear
seems like bizarre to us because you
know our our stereotype for what you do
in fear is you just hightail it out of
there
or you're frozen with your heart beating
you know
again and when you say hour are you
talking a western culture yeah i'm
talking about i'm talking about a
western i'm assuming we're both from
western cultures maybe that was an
assumption but no no your right
assumption what what is so interesting
about the book and what i want to make
sure is coming across is this idea that
we so you have a chapter in the book and
i might invert the title but basically
the brain creates multiple minds
and so you maybe humans have one sort of
brain architecture plan but the mind as
the way that it manifests in the way
that they see the world is actually
wildly different from culture to culture
to culture
yeah you're going exactly where i was
going so
so
we have one general brain plan right
um and it's and it's old it's an old
plan
but
it gives us
like i said before we have we have the
kind of nature that requires nurture so
we we have the kind of genes that
require learning so this brain plan
gives us a brain that is
unfinished it gives us
um
you know a baby's brain that's born
under construction
and the baby's brain has to get wiring
instructions to finish itself so an
infant brain is not a miniature adult
brain it's a brain that's looking for
wiring expecting wiring instructions
from the world those wiring instructions
come from
statistical regularities in the world
things that happen
in a predictable way
and then the brain learns those things
and what does it mean to learn something
it means that actually the wiring is
modified
right the brain is either
tuning up certain connections between
neurons or it's getting rid of unused
connections because they're
metabolically expensive if you have a
typical a neurotypical brain so
a baby's brain
is born
waiting for wiring instructions that
come from
the babies the regularities in the
baby's own body
in the surrounding world
you know like a uh i talk about this you
know um it's a really common example
that if light doesn't hit a baby's
retina and make it to the brain
during the first couple of months of
life the baby's visual system won't
finish developing normally
and
if a brain
is doesn't receive
information about a face
it won't learn
to see faces
i mean babies aren't born seeing knowing
what a face is you have to learn it and
in fact there's really interesting
evidence from people who
are born with very very very bad
cataracts
um so they can't um
you know they can't um
or corneal damage so no light is really
making it to the brain um and then when
they're adults their um
you know corneas are replaced or or
their cataracts are removed um
it's not like they can instantly see
it take they have to learn how to see
just in the same way that you would
learn how to speak another language you
have to learn where are the breaks in
the in the sounds what are the sounds
referred to you're learning because
there are statistical regularities in
the way that sounds
um pair together
uh in a particular language and it turns
out a face is actually a hard thing to
just to see
so
um
you know people when they have to learn
to see a face
sometimes it can take months or even
years for them to be able to recognize a
face as for example male or female i
mean it's just it's really really hard
but it's something that babies learn
after a couple of months because
um actually not even that they really
they learn probably after a couple of
weeks um because they're constantly
being presented with faces at a very
close distance so they can see them you
know
have regularities
i mean in the book you talk about the
brain's ability to categorize and that
you can that it will categorize based on
function so how's it beginning an infant
how's it beginning so quickly to
categorize between male and female
wouldn't it lump them together as
caretaker or human or something like
that
oh what a baby is learning what a
newborn is learning is what is a face
not who is the face is the face male or
female it's just what is a face
what is a face like they're seeing
they're seeing things they're
experientially blind to what they're
seeing
they don't know
what a fake it's not like they recognize
that a face is a face
so for example if i show you any sort of
image that even remotely has a face like
configuration to it in a piece of toast
or you know um in a machine or you know
something that loosely has a dot here a
dot here and a slit here
you're gonna see a face instantaneously
we see faces all over the place that are
not actually faces a baby doesn't do
that because a baby doesn't
put together that the dark thing here
with the light around it and the dark
thing here with the light around it and
the you know so your your eyes and
that's the sclera of your eyes you know
the the iris and the sclera
you know
they don't see an eye
like newborns they don't know what that
is you know they don't there's sound
coming out of you know sound somewhere
coming from but they don't know what a
mouth is they don't know you know babies
don't know what these things are they
have to learn
what those things these things are and
their brains are being wired to
recognize statistical regularities
and
um babies
i guess the point here is that this
opens the door
for
wiring a baby's brain with the concepts
and the meaning the you know movement
related meaning of your culture which is
very could be very different from
another person's culture
so for example
in our culture
right now in this time in this era
if you lose
someone
if you lose a child say you know a child
dies
you feel
grief
you feel grief it's a mental
feeling and you may have physical
aspects to it but you feel
bereft
in some cultures
when you lose a child
you feel sick
you have a sickness an illness
that the feelings in your body are
understood as an illness
do you think they're the same
affectation like is that the same and
just the cultural interpretation as well
so here's the problem you know here's
the problem well when you say just the
cultural interpretation there is no just
the cultural interpretation when your
brain is making a prediction about what
something means that is a very
um
uh
sensory motor prediction there is no
culture laid on top
so
if i um
[Music]
so for example
if i ask you to
um
keep your eyes open and imagine in your
mind's eye
an apple
what do you see in your mind's eye
i see a red apple with a little bit of a
golden
tint to some places the little stem
sticking out of it
that is quite
what i meant actually half the time when
i asked that question people tell me
they see a computer
interesting
um
which is actually but okay so you see an
apple and um and you know you know the
apple's not there but you can see the
ghost of an apple you can see it with
the color right and the shape right okay
so can you ima imagine grabbing that
apple and taking a bite out of that
apple like um can you hear the crunch of
the bite yes and feel it absolutely
can you sort of taste a little bit maybe
it's a little maybe it's a macintosh
apple so maybe it's a little tart but it
has some sweetness to it you know
yeah i would say more than i feel that
one i know intellectually that it would
be there but yes okay but so maybe not
so much but the other that the other
sense is you you've got those right
definitely
okay so you just did this really amazing
thing
your brain
changed the firing of its own neurons
in your visual system so that you could
see the ghost of an apple even though
there is no apple there
and you could
hear the crunch of an apple even though
there actually is no bite and if i had
your head stuck in a brain scanner
i would see massive changes in in visual
cortex increases in activity in auditory
cortex even increases in activity in
motor cortex particularly around your
hand and your mouth
in fact all you have to do with someone
is actually say a word
and their brains automatically will
conjure some image
that is very what we call multimodal
meaning there's a lot of sensory detail
to it
when your brain makes a prediction
about what you are likely to see
that's what it's doing
it's actually changing the firing of
your own neurons
so when you learn a culturally overlaid
meaning
it's not like
there's some physical
representation and then there's some
culture just gets slathered on top like
icing on top of an already baked cake
the cultural meaning
is adding
neural firing
that
wouldn't that wasn't there wouldn't be
there without it
so
if i show you a black and white blobby
image which i've done this i did this in
my ted talk and i do this really
routinely because it's one of the best
ways to demonstrate this if i show you a
black and white blobby image
most people when they look at that they
just see a black and white blobby image
and so we were looking inside your brain
we would see that you were basically
seeing visual noise
black and white blobby image so lots of
contrast but no actual object
and then i can give people an experience
really briefly
that then their brain can draw on that
experience
and then when they're looking at the
black and white blobs all of a sudden
they actually see an object there and
then when you look inside the brain you
can see that there's activity that is
generally representing an object there
this is a pretty
it's a pretty great example and i saw in
your talk when you did it so just for
anybody that's um listening or watching
really
you show the blobs can't tell what they
are and then you show it in color and
you realize it's actually a snake the
one that i saw
and then you go back to the black and
white and now all of a sudden you can
retain
that those blobs are actually in the
shape of a coiled snake so it's the same
image just sort of with color without
color
abstract more realistic
and it is very interesting how all of a
sudden now your brain sees something
that before it couldn't grasp a hold of
now where where i'm going but wait but
why yeah but let me let me just finish
the example before so sorry to cut you
off no i just want to finish the example
so but the point is that what you're
looking at is exactly the same so where
is the additional
where is the additional imagery coming
from it's coming from your own head
what you see
is a combination of what's out there
and what's in here and if what's in here
is culturally is is put here by
something cultural meaning in one
culture one set of knowledge is put
there in another culture another set of
knowledge is put there then that means
that if there's no just cultural overlay
your actual experience of the sense data
is different
it's different because the bits that
you're adding are different
yeah to me that is and and um i i will
try to be more careful with the the
words that i use forgive me i'm going to
keep saying just i'm sure subconsciously
uh because what i mean is i'm trying to
so my fascination my obsession is with
usability right so
in reading your books it's actually
going to change the way that i approach
the world and the tools that i have in
my toolkit in order to
move myself towards my goals so i can
better understand my own neurophysiology
i can maybe it's you know de-escalate a
situation choose a better response
that's more likely to move me towards my
goal whatever if if the information that
you have is more usable
so when i say just culture what i'm
saying is whoa that's super powerful if
what we're talking about is the brain is
giving me
an affect it's giving me a feeling i
have a sense of i'm feeling good or
something's off i'm not sure maybe it's
fatigue maybe it's i need more protein
who knows but there's something that's
off
and one of the first things that i
always encourage people to develop if
they're struggling in their lives is
self-awareness and part of that
self-awareness is a body awareness so
that hey you're feeling something now
if what we're talking about is hey
there's this the the massive impact that
culture has
which i will say is frame of reference
or bundle of beliefs it's it is a thing
that itself is malleable
so
if i can take that affectation lay a new
cultural layer on top of it and sort of
see something i couldn't see before and
you may hackle at this but this to me is
very interesting is is there one culture
that has an approach to the affects that
they feel that is more useful
now to get to useful will have to define
useful i will define it very simply as
does it move you towards your goals and
i'll say the ultimate goal is
fulfillment so
is there a culture balinese western
whatever that is more likely to move you
down a path to fulfillment
well what i would say is
it's the wrong question
what's the right question because
because i know you're going to debunk
why it's a wrong question but i want to
know what the right question is i think
that'll be very helpful
how many concepts
do i are optimal to be able to make
in order
to
achieve my goals efficiently
meaning cultural ideas that i can use to
better contextualize the feeling
yeah because it's really not about
it's really the way to think about
cultures
i think as systems of
practices and beliefs and values and so
on
is that they are
variable solutions to the same problem
so
um
we are social animals we have to live in
groups in order to survive
that's how we evolved it as a species
we have socially dependent nervous
systems and so we have this fundamental
problem that we have to deal with and
that is
how do we get along with each other but
also get ahead so how do we
live as a group but also thrive as an
individual and you one way to think
about cultures is that there are
different solutions to that problem so
what it means to be fulfilled is very
different in different cultures actually
we also
populate
many many many
different
climate and geographic locations on the
earth
so there are different solutions that
are required in order to live in
different places that is in order to get
along versus get ahead that that what
that looks like is different in
different places
um
so
the
i think the answer to your question is
uh really
i suppose if i just took your question
at face value i would say no there's not
one culture that does it better because
the actual what it means to be fulfilled
it actually differs in different
cultures but in a sense a better
question is
is it
will i be more flexible and therefore
more apt
to achieve my goals if i
if my brain has a choice of making more
concepts so if if my menu if my tool kit
is much bigger will i be better off or
or would that be a burden so does that
make it easier or harder
um and the answer seems to be it makes
it easier
so can we go into concepts then for a
second what do you mean exactly by a
concept
well you what you mean by a concept when
you said like knowledge from your
culture you could call that a concept
but here's what a concept is
um
so a group of things which are similar
in some way
is called a category
so you can think about a category say
as a category of cats right
and you know cats are category cats have
certain features they share they're
similar because they all have whiskers
they all have ears that are pointy they
they all you know purr and so on
um
actually it turns out
i say that they purr but it turns out
that the animal sounds the way they're
described in different languages differs
so animals purr in english but when we
describe it in english we call it a per
but actually not all cultures describe
animal sounds in this exactly the same
way that's a whole other like
conversation but let's just say for the
sake of argument they per okay um
but they also have differences
right
that they so i should say so they all
have similar they have similarities so
people used to think well that's the
concept the concept is the description
of the category concept is your
representation of a category
but it turns out that
um
cats differ you know some are big some
are small they have different eye colors
they have different hair fur
thicknesses some don't have fur at all
um so when i ask you
well tell me the concept of a cat who's
a good pet
you conjure something different in your
mind than if i say tell me the concept
of a cat who um is good at catching mice
right or
if i say tell me the concept of a cat
um
who's really cool and like like a really
cool dude and you know like listens to
jazz
like those are all cats
so the point is that you can do it with
birds too you can say well if you know
tell me the concept of a bird
in the park tell me a concept of the bur
of a bird if your goal is to have have a
meal
tell me your concept of a bird if your
goal is to have a pet
and so
here
the idea here is that
go ahead
your brain's always making concepts so
when i say your brain is like if we hold
everything constant and your brain takes
account of the situation
and it has to
so what it's doing when it's predicting
is it's asking
not only what's going to happen
but it's asking what's going to cause
that thing
i'm predicting not only what's happening
but what's causing it
and
when we
when we have sense data that we need to
understand its cause we don't say what
is it
we say
the brain figuratively speaking doesn't
say what is it it says what is this like
in my past experience what is this
similar to
and then it create it re it remembers it
reinstates bits and pieces of past
experience that are similar in some way
to the present so it's creating a
category
online to fit the situation or you might
say it's creating a concept
it's creating a concept to make it's
predicting what concept is going to be
necessary
in the immediate future to guide action
and to predict and
to anticipate sense data and and their
cause
that's what your brain is doing all the
time
so it's not like there's it's not like
there's affect and then you slather
something on top from culture it's
actually all intertwined what you're
when your brain is making a prediction
it's using regularities from experience
in your past and if you live in a
particular culture your regularities are
going to be really different
than somebody in a different culture and
cultures are not only geographic
cultures can be
they can be locational
your brain can make very different
concepts when you're at work and then
versus when you're at home particularly
if they're really different or if you're
in the military and you know when you're
deployed versus when you're on base or
when um
you know if you're if you're a
republican and a democrat or if you're
uh
you know people from different religious
um denominations or different classes um
in in any society my point is that
your brain wires itself to its world
other people partially
really curate that world for you
and
that is not
that's not an it's not an abstract thing
people are teaching you how to
see
how to hear how to smell and how to feel
and how to act
and sometimes
they
they're
imparting that knowledge as
um
part of a they make meaning of that as
an emotional episode or as illness or as
an experience where thinking and feeling
there is no difference between thinking
and feeling it's just an experience
okay so this stuff is incredibly
interesting to me and you are taking us
all on the very journey that i went
through and reading your books of
beginning to reorganize sort of how i
see things so i want to
sort of summarize some of the key things
that i think you've just walked us
through and we can leverage that to
continue the conversation so obviously
if if i touch on anything that isn't
accurate let me know
the first thing i want to deal with is
the notion of a concept which i think
this is if i understand it correctly
this seems insanely powerful which is um
you said that i was asking the wrong
question and that the right question was
basically to understand that a concept
is like a um a tool in your tool kit so
if i have this low resolution
sense of something's not right or
something is joyful but i have a
thousand different boxes that i can put
that in so that my movement forward now
becomes more useful to use my word
towards my goal because i'm not
only putting it into rage
love
laughter punch it's like i have a far
broader
set of things that i can find a nuance
in the context or in the way that i feel
to move this into a different category
you give a great example in the book and
in your talks about how
if a woman goes to the er
and she thinks um that she's maybe
having a heart attack and they're going
to say ah look this is just anxiety
because her buckets are heart attack
anxiety and when they say no you should
be putting it over here on anxiety oh
okay cool i'll go home and there's
obviously all the confusion about the
way that women are looked at in terms of
being a more emotional beast more likely
to be anxious so that all gets tangled
up in it but now given sort of the
limited boxes they tend to go home once
you tell me slotted in anxiety cool i go
home and then they die and they if
you're over 65 and female you are more
likely to die from being sent home from
a heart attack than you are if you're
male will set the complications of why
aside but that once you realize no no
like there are certain feelings that
don't belong in the anxiety box and i
need to have another place in another
place and you know heart attack is one
of them and it could be other things i
mean i heard a story once that there is
a
a country that lacks a certain word for
a certain shade of blue and because they
don't have a name for that shade of blue
they crunch it over into one of the
blues that they do have a name for so if
you take people that grow up with more
names for different shades of blue they
actually see different shades of blue
where the other people actually don't
see it because they only have a mental
category you know that's more limited
is all of that
accurate so far
that that alone right there is is a game
changer when you think about okay cool
my job here is to develop a more
a deeper tool kit so that i can begin to
apply it's a word i'm not sure you're
going to buy into but that i can apply
these tools to the affect that i have
the mood the feeling that something's
right or something absolutely and i i
think apply is a perfectly fine
word because here's what's going to
happen
it's going to be just like the guy who
i'm trying to remember his name mike
something but i can't remember his last
name
mike
michael no i'm not going to remember
because it's a long time ago now more
than 10 years but if i interviewed him
he's one of these guys who had corneal
damage and then when he was 40 he had
his corneas replaced
and the way he describes it is
like learning my words are like learning
a second language but he
had to consciously guess
very deliberately guess at
so he's very deliberately making
concepts
to try to figure out what visual input
means
very deliberately really hard at first
but then over time he gets more
practiced at it
and eventually for some things he can do
it pretty automatically like his brain
just does it automatically
and um
this is
we're we're all familiar with this
anytime you learn a new skill for
example
you you know
you or a new workout routine you know
you have to deliberately think about it
i mean i lift weights i've been lifting
weights for i don't know almost 30 years
and i have a trainer and you know i get
bored easily so he has to constantly you
know give me new programs and
at first i have to be really deliberate
about what i'm doing because it's a new
program whatever eventually i get really
practiced at it why because my brand's
predicting now really well
and so this is why you know interval
training is so effective right because
they're constantly changing it so you
your brain can't predict and that means
you're getting a maximal workout for
your effort which is good you're
draining your body budget i don't think
we've talked about bodybuilders yet but
you know you're basically spending a lot
of energy you're going to replenish that
energy and you're going to be stronger
for it so
at first you are applying you are you're
consciously guessing
or consciously curating
but eventually if you practice just like
driving if you practice any skill your
brain eventually becomes very odd your
brain will do it automatically
and that's the value
of having a wide variety
of experiences that your brain can now
use to not just to um
you use them to predict those exact
experiences in the future but your brain
has this capacity to take bits and
pieces and combine them in new ways
and to make predictions of novel things
that you've never seen before or heard
or smelled or what or felt and what have
you so i think the the important thing
to understand is that
every experience you have
has the capacity to even a little bit
change
your brain's
function in the future every experience
you make for yourself
that you curate or that you have has the
capacity to change your wiring a little
bit
and over time
you can
have more
flexibility and therefore more control
over
your actions towards your goals
you might even change your goals
you know or you might change what it
means to implement your goals
based on
um
your exp the richness of your experience
so what do you say to people that are
experiencing something
that are stuck on something in the past
well sometimes people are stuck on
something
it depends on why they're stuck so
it's not always
some it's not always a matter of
willpower i guess is the thing i think
one of the things that
you know
let me just say that um
i'll try to think of how to say this
you know i originally when when i went
to graduate school i i was originally
training to not be a neuroscientist i
was originally trained to be a therapist
and one of the things i felt like
i i felt that
sometimes in some of the
some of the psychotherapeutic treatments
i don't want to say that they were
disrespectful to people but i i felt a
little bit like interesting you know
people
when someone is feeling really bad
this is this is their way of being in
the world and if they could change it by
snapping their fingers and doing
something different they would
so obviously they can't and it's not
because they're weak and it's not
because you know now we would say oh
well you know that person's a snowflake
it's not because they're snowflakes it's
because they're human
so here's what i i guess this is this is
the the conclusion that i've come to
after
you know i was always sort of
uncomfortable
with um well you know just change how
you think and that will change how you
feel that's actually not true by the way
and i it's also
even if it were it would be like
incredibly hard to pull off even for the
smartest you know person who has the
most willpower in the world because it's
really not about willpower i guess
that's that's the thing i i ended up
coming to the conclusion it's really not
about willpower
um
it's about understanding that there's a
temporal dynamic here
your brain is using your past
in order to create your present well for
your future basically which becomes your
present you cannot go back into your
past and change it i mean you can try
with psychotherapy but it's really not
going to work very well you don't think
well you can't realize it
yeah i think you can but i think it's a
struggle
but what you can do is you can change
your present which becomes your past
to predict your future so you you can
think of it as you're always cultivating
your past
and what would that process look like
you you're telling yourself a new story
you're giving yourself that new concept
giving yourself new experiences
so that you can learn to predict
differently in the future automatically
without willpower
but even more so what i want to say is
this you know
um
and so now i'm going to introduce this
idea of a body budget in order to to
make the point that i wanted to make
about like what do you tell someone when
they're stuck
you know your brain your brain's most
important job is is regulating your body
and
it it regulates all the systems in your
body
um predictively
um that's there's a fancy word for that
it's called allostasis
um but uh i always describe it to people
as like think of it as a budget
you know your your brain is running a
budget for your body and it's not
budgeting money it's budgeting salt and
glucose and water and all the things
oxygen all the things that the set your
cells need to function to keep you alive
and well to you know allow you to do
your brain's most important job right
which is to pass your genes on to the
next generation and have that next
generation survive long enough to
produce the next generation i love that
most people don't know that actually but
that's that's right
and
so it's running this budget
and so you can think of like every new
thing that you learn
and
every movement that you make
as an expense
on that budget it's an investment
and
every
thing you eat every s
you know time you sleep every hug you
get from another person or whatever
support that you get those are like
deposits
and so
normally like when you exercise for
example you have a big out it's a big
expense so your body budget is running a
deficit briefly so you feel you know
when you're exercising
i am not one of these people who like
feels great when they exercise
and you know i usually get to a point
where i'm like i hate this and i
want it to be over and that's the point
at which i'm really tempted to stop but
i know
that not to stop the feeling is doesn't
mean i'm out of energy it just i'm i'm
just starting to really run a deficit
now and now it's going to be unpleasant
until i'm done
um
and then you know if i replenish
right if i make a deposit afterwards i
make sure that i drink enough and i eat
something or whatever you know
and i get enough sleep that night and
whatever then i'm then i'm my my my body
budget is balanced
but what if
you don't replenish
what if
you're not sleeping well
you don't eat healthfully it's funny
that you mentioned protein because that
actually it turns out brains
i think all brains except for two
species on this planet eat
to a protein target actually so i always
think of myself as being completely
dominated by carbohydrates my whole i
mean like i just you know um
i have to work very hard not to eat
carbohydrates but actually under the
hood my brain is doing what every other
organism's brain is doing and it's it's
tabulating protein protein protein so
we'll talk about that later but that's i
love that research because it so
violates my own like in my own
experience and intuitions i just find it
like completely fascinating
but okay so you know but what if you
what if you live in a food desert what
if um what if you don't have enough
money to feed your family on a regular
basis what if
you live in a sea of social ambiguity
which is very uncertainty is very hard
on a nervous system really expensive um
what if
um
you know uh you have a metabolic problem
like maybe you have a problem with your
mitochondria which are the little
powerhouses in your cells you know you
could be running a body budget that and
the deficit is never big
it's the tax you pay is little it's
incremental it's like a slow drip and it
just bores a hole
you know over time so you're just going
to feel like for a really long time
when you're in a situation like that
you can try all you want
to um you know change how you think but
basically your
your
body has a grip on your brain
you know it's a conversation
your brain is always controlling your
body and your body is sending
information back to your brain but if
you are running a body budgeting deficit
you are going to feel like
and
you may not be able to just think
differently
in part because remember
if we freeze the moment
your brain is representing what's in the
world and what's in your body
and that's what it uses to make the next
prediction which becomes your
perceptions and your thoughts
so if you are feeling like what is
your brain going to direct you direct
the thought to something negative in the
past something that's similar to the
present from the past
so
ruminating and being stuck
might be it might be freed up just by
getting enough sleep that night you know
it might be freed up by just providing
people with opportunities to have
different experiences and so
they direct their attention to the world
and they're and then they can create
these different experiences for
themselves but if you're running a body
budgeting deficit
it's not a matter of willpower
it's it's it could be actually
impossible
and and you won't be able to create new
experiences for yourself because
the two most expensive things your body
can do your brain can do are move your
body
and learn something new
change its own wiring right
and what do you do when you're running a
deficit in your actual bank account
what do you do
stop no more spending stop spending
and so what does it mean for a brain to
stop spending
chills
become fatigued
you become fatigued you feel your body
feels heavy like you can't move
and you stop learning and you might even
stop paying attention to the world so
you're just going with your internal
model the prediction that's running
based on your past experience and you're
not even really adjusting to the context
at all
and that my friend is the beginnings of
depression
all right now in the book you talk about
how and you do it delicately but you
talk about how hey as we get more
knowledge and we realize what's really
going on that comes with responsibility
so
the first thing you've said just now
that that i it doesn't match what i
believe to be true and i'm very open
like you i am drawn to things that make
me rethink everything so if you have an
insight here that i'm just missing but
that it would be impossible for somebody
who's at a body budget deficit to make
these changes that does not strike me as
true
so one what responsibility do we have i
guess let's answer that and then we can
you can show me where the error of my
way is with thinking that it's never
impossible if you're i'll i'll lump it
and say
at least if you're neurotypical it's
never impossible there are certainly
people that fall outside of that i think
it depends yeah i think it depends on
where you are actually so first of all
where
yeah physically like where you are so
for example let me just say that i think
that uh for example
um
you could be neurotypical but you could
have a mitochondrial um
you could have a mitochondrial variant
that makes you body budget inefficient
just it's inefficient
and you're you're going to be constantly
struggling your whole life actually
with weight and probably with your mood
because your body budgets it's your
brain just has to work harder to keep
things in in
imbalance and and you might it might
never be able to do that because you
have a mitochondrial dysfunction now
let's say that was your daughter
what would you whisper into her ear you
got this you can do it you can overcome
this or
hey you just have to accept that this is
too hard it's out of your reach
oh i would schlep her off to a doctor
and i would have her tested and i would
get her medication because that's really
what she needs but since you brought up
my daughter here is what i tell my
daughter so my daughter is of the
generation
um she's 21 years old and she's of the
generation she's the anxiety and
depression generation you know she
everyone i mean it's a it's a bloody
epidemic right i don't have a friend who
has a college or high school age kid who
isn't anxious or depressed
this is not a weakness this is we live
in a if i had to design a culture that
would bankrupt a human body budget it
would be this one seriously so bad food
social media what what are the elements
that are not yeah
yeah bad food like pseudo food really i
mean going to a supermarket around the
edges is real food and everything else
is really not designed for it's really
designed to bankrupt your body budget
frankly your your brain is predicting
that there's going to be you know
nutrients there but but there is but
there aren't any and actually i i a
colleague of mine does research on it
it's really fascinating stuff but if we
start talking about that we're never
going to go anywhere else so
so crappy food you don't sleep enough we
sit and we stare at screens
that
that reflect light at a particular
wavelength that is received by a
ganglion cell in our retina that screws
with our
circadian rhythms
screwing with your circadian rhythm is
screwing with your body budget
and when you look for example at clock
genes the genes that are regulated that
regulate um
uh your circadian rhythm
who's
whose transcription is affected by
these you know light so g you know the
environment turns genes on and off and
so
these genes are are dysregulated your
circadian rhythm is dysregulated if you
look at people for example who committed
suicide from depression
compared to other deaths what you see is
that the enormous dysregulation in their
clock genes
they have circadian rhythm disorders and
they don't even know it
so
so screens
too long and too late
social media
lack of context lots of social ambiguity
and evaluation
lack of exercise
lack of sleep
i could go on how about just the casual
brutality with which we speak to one
another
you know casual brutality tell me yeah
how about this hey
i could be saying to you
hey tom good to see you or i could be
saying you're a and i'm
gonna i'm gonna punch you in the face
like i love it hey like what is
that
and it's not just because i'm old
because i asked my nephews and my nieces
i'm like do you know for sure that that
person is saying like hey honey
and they're like not really i'm like
yeah exactly it's ambiguity and that's a
cut you're paying all these little taxes
all these little metabolic taxes and you
don't even know it so
and for adolescents
they're
they're you know all of these things
that we think of as you know we have
names for things right like so we have
sex hormones and we think that they're
just for you know the maturation of um
of sex um uh characteristics and we have
dopamine and we call that a reward
transmitter and we have serotonin and we
call that a mood transmitter
neurotransmitter they're all for
regulating metabolism that's their basic
function they all do different things
so um
what you have is you have an adolescent
who's
um
you know
gonna have be having body up the body
budgeting burden is just increased by
variability in hormones just right
across the board
their social environment or what we
would call social niche has just
expanded tremendously from you know
grade school to middle school to high
school
plus social media that's a lot of
ambiguity
that's again a burden for the body
budget
and they're probably not sleeping enough
just because of how high schools
organize themselves they're definitely
not getting enough sleep you know all
these things and i think the thing to
remember is that none of there are no
simple single causes for anything when
it comes to biology they're all multiple
little non-linear causes that influence
each other so they're all these little
things that are kind of like piling up
piling up piling up
and eventually
you know something breaks
and so i guess the point here is that
if you
you know how long does it take to get to
the point where something breaks and you
become depressed
like literally you know like like major
depression it's different for different
people
in part because you know when it comes
to people variation is the norm
you think about a certain think about
any characteristic biological or
psychological and it varies
there's just really there's no like norm
you know there's it one of the things
that darwin
is um
less famous for than he should be you
know everyone thinks oh darwin you know
natural selection evolution yeah that's
true but what is natural selection about
selecting on variation that's what it's
about what darwin showed which is the
really remarkable thing is that
there is no average
there is no norm that's a myth it's a
statistical summary that's an
abstraction what's real is the variation
so
you so when i say actually
k with most people can they overcome
things by willpower it depends on how
um
how encumbered their body budgets are
there actually are some people who are
so bankrupt body budget wise that they
have to have electrodes implanted in
their brains
in order to recover from depression
because even medication doesn't do it
if you were going to create the ultimate
knowing what you know how would you pull
that person out so one thing we haven't
talked about yet is
you you obviously touched on it in terms
of development but if we're as a species
we're helping to regulate each other's
bodies which is a fascinating concept
i've never heard anybody but you talk
about it
and you get this sense that we're all in
a dance and in the book you say that
there's this friction between freedom
and oh god i forget the other word that
you use do you remember
it's like
oh dependency dependency thank you
i i think what you're saying is that
yeah i think what i was saying what i'm
saying in the book is that you know we
evolved as a social species and we
evolved in such a way what that means is
we are the caretakers of each other's
nervous systems we
we make deposits metaphorically and
withdrawals in each other's body budgets
like the best thing for a human nervous
system or a human body budget is another
human
the worst thing for a human body budget
is also another human you know and so
we
we really do affect people in ways that
we are largely unaware of
and
and other people affect our biology in
ways that we are largely unaware of
sometimes too and that's just a fact i
mean you know scientists try not to use
the f word too much fact you know um
but it but i mean it's it's close as
close to a fact as as you could ever get
to
um
but we live in a culture that we live in
a culture western most western cultures
value
individual rights and freedoms and so
how do you balance that
how do you balance having socially
dependent nervous systems with the fact
that we value individual rights and
freedoms
it's a conflict
and in this culture in the united states
if you even try to have that discussion
somebody's going to try to like
you know cut you off
at the knees at the head whatever you're
you're like you know you're doomed and i
know this
from first-hand experience i'm ready to
have it i i won't cut you off you may be
ready to have it but i mean and there
are times when i've raised it in the
past when you know
000 emails and you know death threats
later seriously no i'm not joking
actually it's crazy no i laugh because i
get the same thing yeah i totally get it
yeah okay so so um so my my point is
that um it's a it's a hard conversation
to have but it is a conversation that we
have to have and you know my personal
stance now now i'm now taking off my lab
coat right now i'm not being a scientist
now i'm just telling you
now as a person the way that you
negotiate that is by taking
responsibility not just for yourself but
more responsibility for other people's
well-being that's a way to handle it
um not because people are snowflakes but
because they're human
they're human
and they have human nervous systems
and if you don't want to take that
responsibility that's fine but you will
pay
at some point you will pay you will pay
in higher um you know health care costs
you will pay in higher um in you know
people being unable to
um
learn you know to compromise or to learn
about each other i mean look at look at
the
situation that we find ourselves in
right now
i'm not saying that all of it is reduced
reducible to you know metabolic burden
but i think metabolic burden is kind of
the unspoken un sort of hidden you know
um
biological element that nobody's talking
about and that has a huge role to play
in the situation that we find ourselves
in because it influences so strongly the
affect that you then interpret
and so if you're always like oh god i
just don't feel right then you're always
reaching for the negative explanation
because this feeling is like that
negative thing that happened
exactly exactly and that's really
interesting
so i do i just want to say i do i i
i don't i want to be really clear that i
i'm not saying that we all have to be
nice to everybody all the time no matter
what
um you know if you talk to my daughter
she will tell you my mother is not the
kind of person who is
you know um and i'm not saying that we
can't disagree and i'm not saying that
we can't criticize each other and i'm
not even saying that we can sometimes
get really totally mad with each
other we totally can but you can also be
respectful in the way that you engage
people when you totally disagree with
them
and even further i would say i'm not
saying that people
um
can't with willpower overcome
negative feelings i'm just saying that
sometimes
sometimes actually it's not possible but
i think we have to have more compassion
when people suffer
we have to have more compassion for
people and and part of that compassion
is equipping them with the knowledge
that they need to have in order to help
themselves
so for example
do you think that
go ahead this might what you're saying
might answer my question no no no
so what i was going to say is one once
they have that so you we all have that
responsibility to give them compassion
um to want good things to try to create
the soil in which they can grow
we i'll even go into we have the
obligation to make sure that they are
actually aware of how the human body and
mind all actually work but then once
they're armed with that information do
they have an obligation to themselves
are they accountable
absolutely yes absolutely absolutely and
in fact
i mean there's so much to say about that
i don't even i don't even know where to
start but you know as a as an educator
this is what i always tell my students
your education is your responsibility
if you
it really is your responsibility your
when you pay tuition to go to university
which is
a it
you know speaking as a first generation
college student who lived really on the
edge of poverty until i was you know out
of graduate school
my whole life
i i have to say that i think a
university education is a privilege it
really is a privilege that should be
extended to everyone but it is a
privilege
and when you pay money you are paying
money for the opportunity to learn
that's what you're paying for and your
education
is your responsibility
my responsibility as an educator
is to create a context where you can
learn
it's my job to create that context well
so that learning is the path of least
resistance for you
but it's your job and your
responsibility to learn it
and when you do it's your success
not mine it's yours and if you don't
it's also your responsibility
you're don't you don't go to college or
high school or any educate you know i
mean we're talking about you have to
have a certain degree of age before you
can you know have understand that you
have this responsibility but i think
high school students can probably deal
with it and i i think that um
you know you are given the opportunity
to learn
but the learning is your responsibility
it's no one else's responsibility but
yours
if everybody else is doing their job my
job is to create a context and so to
some extent that's what i'm doing
by writing this book and by talking to
people like you and and so on i'm i'm
giving people what i understand to be
the best
take on what i understand to be the most
up-to-date science
and i'm giving it to people and i'm
saying this is my understanding
use it
if you use it it's your choice if you
your choice to use it if you use it you
use it if you don't use it you don't use
it i'm you know i can't tell you what to
do but i can tell you this is how
this is how i would do things
and so for example
um
so my daughter is part of this
generation
and
you know she came up with
you know so she'll say you know she
would say things like i'm depressed and
i would be like are you depressed are
you depressed
or
you're like oh okay mom i'm not
depressed i'm just feeling my my body
budget is you know and then running a
deficit
and then but eventually she came to me
and she said i have a new concept
okay
emotional flu i have the emotional flu
interesting
yeah what is the emotional flu the
emotional flu is i feel like
i'm i'm suffering i have distress i
don't feel good
i know that everything in my life is
okay
but i just feel bad and i want to tell
you about it i just want to tell you
that i feel bad and i want to hug
and uh and you know and i but i know
everything is okay
and i'm not gonna go and you know
i'm not gonna i'm not gonna ruminate i'm
not gonna you know i'm not gonna do
these things but i i i do just want to
communicate to you that i'm bad feeling
bad and i want you to acknowledge it and
give me a hug and that's the deal right
that's the deal
um because she could come to me and say
oh this one doesn't like me and i didn't
get you know i didn't i only got a you
know b on this paper and i and she can
if you feel like and you look
around to try to make sense of that
by looking uh by that feeling and
looking around at things that go wrong
in your life you're always going to find
something and then that's going to
direct your behavior and then down you
go on this spiral
or take the present moment i don't know
about you but i've been having a little
bit of trouble with my mood over the
last
a couple of months
it's hard
it's a situation that's really hard
covet is hard for a number of reasons
for everybody
and then on top of that we have all this
other political stuff it's really hard
and there are some and i have 25 people
in my lab
that i have to take care of who i can't
see in person
and in addition to my family and um
and i'm weary i'm really weary
so some days i wake up and i think
my body budget
is probably running a deficit today so i
have to make sure
that i in addition to working out in the
morning i probably have to go for a walk
after work
and
i also probably should make sure that i
get enough sleep tonight
because i can if i go for a couple of
nights without getting enough sleep
things are going to feel much worse
because sleep is just so critical
actually to
running a healthy nervous system
so
i think when you know things you can
about how your nervous system works you
your brain and your body you can start
to intervene earlier so that you never
get to the point where
it feels impossible by sheer magnitude
of willpower just to drag yourself
forward in your life
that's um and i think
there are a lot of things that you can
do little little things that you can do
that add up to a really big effect
um to allow you to realize your your
your goals
so that you don't blink your eyes and
wake up and you're 70 and wonder what
the hell happened to my life and what
did i do with it what are those little
things
well get enough sleep
for example
um
um when you um
the minute that you start becoming
furious with someone for not doing what
you want them to do or for having a view
that you don't like or whatever
remember that um the buddhist you know
buddhist uh saying that anger is a form
of ignorance
if you're angry it probably means that
there's something that you don't know
and maybe you should be curious instead
and so anger was born using your
language that anger is born of you get a
feeling an uncomfortable feeling from
not knowing feeling on the spot
you have limited boxes to put that in
what does this look like looks like ah
the last time i felt like this i was
angry boom you shove it up into the
angry box and you react
you feel angry you and your actions are
uh whatever it means for you to be angry
in that situation now you know sometimes
anger is useful okay so
um when you're playing soccer or you
know uh interesting you know this
feeling
or when you're in a competition or
that's with the data show like sometimes
in sports or sometimes in a competition
or in a debate or why isn't sometimes
anger is a
well why is it good i mean the evidence
is that that when people cultivate anger
instrumentally sometimes it actually
improves their performance why does it
perform improve the performance
because probably you know what you do in
anger anger isn't one thing it's a whole
population of different instances that
you can draw on and with different
actions that you take so
um
that probably because it's it's
initiated the concept that you form has
initiated an action plan to engage in a
particular way like maybe cutting your
opponent off not letting them talk
see this is interesting to me like when
you start talking about okay what are
the if if emotion what we're calling
emotion and and i will remind everybody
to put it into this context that you
bring to it which is i think quite
fundamentally different from how they
probably came in thinking about it but
you you've got this thing an action
potential or an action plan that you're
now
building out and we begin to realize why
this is the thing that evolution has
handed to us so when i think about
anger being useful out on the soccer
field one i'm sure you're you know the
studies about people have a higher
degree of pain tolerance if you allow
them to express or embody anger so one
you're just going to be able to endure
running more
you're going to be more willing to get
into a challenge so to use soccer right
you've got to be able to get in there
get physical also makes you feel more
aggressive
so it's
interesting when you see somebody click
in they've just got a new gear they run
a little faster they've you know they're
more aggressive they're more focused and
so
i have thought a lot about whether i
should be walking a buddhist path of you
know all of life is suffering and you
just let it go and you stop um desire if
you know if all of life is suffering and
all of suffering is born of desire you
just let go of the desire
and i
i i was probably too young to to say
that i have given that a fair shake but
i've looked at that like pretty up close
and what i walked away from that saying
is that
if it made me feel less engaged and that
i actually liked the game even though it
had highs and lows if i could find a way
to sort of buffer those so that my low
wasn't just me falling through the floor
and you know falling forever and ever
and ever and i had some sort of buffer
which to me
go ahead
yeah i i totally hear what you're saying
and and i you know i would be a
hypocrite if i said that i lived my
whole life in a zen buddhist uh you know
um state
nobody would ever accuse me of that um
but what i what i want to say is that
sometimes it is useful
and sometimes
this is describing
yeah and sometimes it is useful and
sometimes it isn't and so
again the more concepts you can make the
more flexible you are the more you can
tailor your actions to the situation to
achieve your goal whatever that goal is
and sometimes you can even change your
goal
and so i would say sometimes you know um
you can feeling what you're calling
anger and i would call it to me it
sounds like um
the elongat emotion of um leg
which is energized aggression
in a group
there's always a groupie feeling to it
it's not something you ever do by
yourself right so when i watch soccer
players or hockey players you know i'm
from canada hockey players
that's legit to me that's like that's
what i'm witnessing this kind of groupie
sort of um i don't mean groupie like fan
i mean group like with group of people
um
energized
aggression
you know or energized um you could also
have energized um grief
where people get together and whale you
know so there's there are lots of
versions of it but you know because
again any emotion category is not one
thing it's a population of things it's
variable um sometimes that is really
useful
i'm a very competitive person
um
i like that about you you know
what can i say and that it is what it is
um i am a very competitive person but i
also think that sometimes
that's not useful
and
and how would you define useful do you
buy into my idea of it if it moves you
towards your goal it's useful and if it
doesn't it doesn't or do you have a more
nuanced yeah no i would say that's
exactly it's yeah i would say that's
exactly right but so for example
i don't think that um
i think that sometimes
winning
is not the right goal to have
um because
you know like just look at the political
situation that we're in
some people vote for a president merely
because they just want to the other
side they don't actually care who
they're but no i'm serious no i agree
sadly
but how is that
how is that helpful or useful to anybody
actually
do you have an answer
what do you mean
like i i actually think i have a
hypothesis on why people do that
but i'm super curious if you have one as
well
oh i absolutely have one but i but i i
guess the point that i was trying to
make is that
um
so i'm not trying to deflect i just the
point that i was trying to make is i
think
oh it's okay
um is that um
um
i
i actually think that
sometimes it's better to
be curious
and to listen more than you talk which
for me is hard it's not that i'm not
curious i'm very curious i just also as
you can see talk a lot but i i i
sometimes think well when someone really
disagrees with me
i
i don't always actually just want to
convince them that i'm right sometimes
the right thing to do my goal
is to um
listen
um to what they
have to say if they're willing
to have a real conversation with me so
just as an example
you know
i published something in the new york
times a couple of years ago that was
widely
misunderstood because i actually was
trying to make the point about
responsibility and choice and that's not
how it was taken and i got all this hate
mail and it was very hard and you know
police forces had to get involved and it
was just it was a mess
yeah there were something you wrote
yeah
wow is that still i have to read the
article that you seem so even-handed to
me the article that got you needing
police protection i have to read
i'm sure you're not eager to advertise
what it is right now uh but i i will
maybe ask you all i'm happy to tell you
i mean i'm happy to tell you what it is
but but i i just want to make the point
that i'm making and then i'll tell you
what it is and then we can go back to
the other thing we're like already we're
lining up our things so that's this is
to me this is like the um this is like
the
uh sign of an excellent conversation
because there's just so many you know
things to follow up on but
i guess the point that i want to make is
that after
after um
after
you know my i could call my nervous
system down and my husband my husband
who i swear i could count on one hand
the number of times he's ever been upset
or angry in his life he's just a really
even keeled kind of a guy
was
you know really shaken by this we were
all really shaken by this
eventually though i started to email
people back
and say you know what
i
um
don't listen to insults and threats but
if you have an honest question or you
want to have an honest conversation with
me
i am definitely willing to have that
conversation but don't be rude
like just don't don't threaten don't be
you know like just don't like you know
yeah and
and what's really interesting is that i
would say you know
a handful of people
actually answered me back
and i actually had conversations with
them
and in one case
it went on for
you know
uh
like at least a week
and
um
and it was a really good conversation
and of course i was left with the
i was first of all i was really happy to
have those conversations
but i also
felt like well
why would you ever think that
approaching someone with
epithet after epithet like just all of
this coming out of your mouth why
would you think that that would be the
way to connect with someone like it just
if you're if you're somebody who's
really willing to to like
have that conversation
why not just start that way
you know i did
i did some you know i'll just be really
honest because you couldn't figure it
out already you know i voted for joe
biden and um i for the first time in my
entire life
called people
on behalf of that campaign i've never
done this in my whole life but i decided
i want to talk to people in swing states
and i want to i really want to so i
would get a republican on the phone and
that you know people people would say
sometimes they just hang up or they'd be
rude um i'm sure that democrats are rude
when they get it you know when they're
called by republicans so you know it's
not like anybody has the you know the
handle on rudeness um but you know so
but sometimes
they'd be like well i'm a deb i'm
running for trump you don't want to talk
to me and i'd be like oh no i you are
the person i actually want to talk to
that's why i'm doing this and you know
some people in the end were
were not you know they were just
with me and they didn't really want to
have a conversation but a couple of
people really did and i would say at
least once each night i had a real
conversation with someone and from my
perspective that was worth it
because
i'm not somebody who thinks that i have
everything figured out about why things
are the way they are but my goal right
now is
not to win it's to fix things i i don't
i just want things to be i want people
to be able to debate i don't necessarily
think that everybody has to agree
i mean i i think if there were one thing
that i would want to convince people of
it's that
harming children is bad and nobody
should do it ever and i don't care what
they've done i don't care what their
parents have done you just shouldn't
separate children from their parents
like if i just had one thing that i just
wanted to really convince somebody of it
would be that that it's just it doesn't
matter doesn't matter where they come
from and it doesn't matter what their
parents did and it doesn't matter what
you believe about immigration you should
never separate a child from from its
parents ever
because you're harming that murderer
okay
sure yeah you should
but then find the child a home that's
safe
i guess my point i'm talking about
immigration here i'm talking about like
all the things that inflame people there
are certainly some things i feel like i
need to put my foot down about and that
would be one but that would be one based
also on science you know i just the
damage that you do to a child
um
to a developing brain when you put
children in those circumstances is
i think
i think a lot of people just don't
realize what
how harmful it is um
but
but um
and i'm not saying that i don't have
really strong beliefs because i do and
i'm not saying that i don't have really
strong political beliefs because i do
and and i of course do i want those
political beliefs to reign yeah of
course i would like that but but i also
feel like
the country's being torn apart by by
really complex set of forces and one of
those forces is that people aren't
actually talking to each other and
they're they're really vilifying each
other in a way that is
you know unhelpful to
the goal of having a democracy
now if people don't have the goal to
have a democracy there's not really much
i can do about that like i you know that
that's my goal right um that that's one
of the things that's important to me and
so
um
i think that um curbing anger in
in the service of curiosity is very
useful for towards that goal so
am i you know do i think that winning is
important yeah i think that winning is
important but i don't always think it's
the mo we all have multiple goals
and we all have to at any given point in
time we have to negotiate which goals
we're going to put first
and sometimes
um
you know
it's not like you give up your other
goals you just sometimes shift around
the
um
the um
what's what has priority
yeah i think priority is probably the
angle into that because as you're
describing that i'm thinking
it seems like just good sense right
you're asking yourself okay i have this
smaller thing here which is i want to
win on this you know maybe it's to get
your candidate elected but then you have
a bigger thing which is i want the
democracy to be healthy
and if the democracy is healthy and
we're not tearing each other apart and
we're able to openly debate ideas and
you know hopefully create a world where
the best ideas are rising to the surface
and
so that becomes the win right and the
ability to sort of shift between
those goals because oftentimes and this
is something i see people struggle with
a lot they have competing goals and they
don't even recognize and so one of the
things when i'm working with people is
just
what's your goal say it in a sentence
most people can't say in a single
sentence what their goal is
and
when you get that conflict the analogy i
always run for people is
i get the equivalent of people telling
me all the time i want to win a gold
medal and i'm like amazing at what the
olympics yes summer or winter summer
fantastic swimming or tennis swimming
amazing backstroke freestyle medley
because you've got to get specific to
the point where you know what to do
right the brain is a prediction engine
but it's trying to
actually get to the point where it knows
precisely what to do next and if people
never take the time to figure out oh i
actually want two things that right now
are coming into conflict and then
priority is the only way to sort it out
because these two
in that moment in that way cannot
coexist and so now you have to know
which one is above the other and once
you have that then it's like cool i
still want this thing but this is a
higher priority so i'm gonna lean on
that right but i think sometimes i guess
what i would say though tom is that
sometimes
you know you have one you have you have
a you have a hierarchy of goals and you
have a priority and that priority is
stable regardless of what situation
you're in all right but sometimes that's
not the case like
um
sometimes
your goals can shift around even in a
given situation
and that's okay that's not a sign of
weakness that's a sign of flexibility
and
um
so do i you know do i
you know do i have
particular goals about
you know
like political things sure but
um but those might those might take a
back a back you know seat to say some
other goal that's really important like
um
i mean i don't know because i'm i'm
making this up as i'm going but like i
can conceive of situations where i would
say okay well that's important but i'm
gonna that's gonna take a back seat for
a minute um because i'm there's some
other goal in the immediate future
that i wanted that i want to achieve
that's even more important than
democracy although i don't know what
that is but i'm just saying in in the
abstract that that would be possible and
i think that there are people like that
right i think that there are some people
who say um yeah democracy is important
but it's not as important as
um
you know um
lower taxes and it's not or it's not as
important as immigration or it's not as
important as banning abortion and so
i don't some people will say yeah i
don't particularly like trump and i know
he's a cheater
but i don't care that he's cheating
because his cheating actually gets me
what i want and that's most important
and
i think that instead of looking at
someone like that if you're if you're if
you're a liberal progressive person
instead of looking at that person and
just like being okay well you know
you know being judgmental what you
should do is look at that person and say
huh okay
tell how do you get to that point like
explain to me like i want to understand
how you how i want to understand how
that works
because
i could conceive of a situation where i
might feel like that one day
i don't know what it is
but
i
you know every conversation you have is
an opportunity to learn
so i can't think of a time when i think
it would be okay to try to prevent
people from voting because you know that
way i'm more likely to get what i want
but
i could imagine
in principle in the abstract that there
could be some
time like that that i would
you know do that i don't know what they
would be but i can imagine that that
would happen i think it's at least
interesting
i i think i do and to me
the the idea that you're trying to
understand the person is the right idea
and leading you talk about empathy in
the book
and you talk about empathy as actually
being a practice something that you can
do like when you understand the way that
emotions are created which is really you
know the big theme i would say of both
of the books
of yours that i've read
and when you understand the brain is the
prediction engine and how it's you know
sort of making good on what that affect
is that it feels and it's trying to
interpret the world
you begin to realize okay there are ways
for you to project yourself into
somebody else's
you know interplay of how they feel
mixed with the um
the concepts that they have writing on
top of that as their sort of
interpretation you know to use language
that they have all these different words
to choose from that allow them to
understand and express but the fact that
you're leading with just wanting to
understand people and i said this to
another neuroscientist david eagleman
and and he laughed
which i think is the right answer but
i think you'll understand what i'm
trying to get to which is my whole thing
is
as silly as this sounds it's
directionally i think correct which is
you have to approach people that you
disagree with even if you disagree with
them violently you have to first fill
your heart with love which is how i'm
interpreting what you're saying you
first have to want to understand like
where they're coming from you have to
understand that like imagine for a
second that your punch line when you
read their beliefs is well they're just
like iq dumb they just their their
actual brain will never achieve the
level that mind will and yes i'm saying
this tongue-in-cheek is but even if you
think that there's a way to go
but i meet them with compassion right
like if had i ever met einstein i would
hope he would have the compassion to
have a conversation and you know
and feel for my inferior intellect
rather than
intelligence
i'm laughing though not because i don't
know why david laughed i'm not sure what
his but you know well he actually had a
pretty pretty powerful answer but but go
ahead uh oh well i i would love to hear
that answer but let me just say that's
very buddhist though tom so i just
wanted to point out that you know you
you said that you've um
let's get into it so
you know i mean
i'm just gonna say that um
compassion
is uh
approaching people with compassion is
not that's
let's just say that um being uh
maintaining equanimity and become and
remaining detached is only one
philosophical path in contemplative
practice another is compassion that you
that you meet people where they are with
compassion
um and non-judgment as a way of of
learning that's a that's a very buddhist
practice
but so what did david say
basically he said you have to have
strategies so we were talking about okay
really really if you wanted to solve
this problem what would you do and he
was talking about how in native american
tribes they came up with this idea of
clans so you had the tribes and the
tribes might be at war but he said the
way that they would begin to broker
peace would be to create like the bear
clan the coyote clan the beaver clan
whatever and those clans were made up of
some of each group and he said once you
had people and you actually talk about
this in your book which is imagine if
you brought people and there's a real
group doing this where they take
israelis and palestinians and they make
them play soccer together or whatever
yeah and they suddenly in sharing the
pitch with somebody and competing with
them and not just against them and being
able to talk openly about stuff they
they begin to bond
and yeah you i
it was you had me concerned with clans
but then when you explained what you
meant that that that makes it that makes
a lot of sense yeah and i thought that
was brilliant
yeah here's what i wanted to do and i
actually
um
this is what i what i wanted to do i
wanted to instead of having um
i never can remember don't laugh at me
when i say this but i never can remember
i think it's tumblr tumblr is the dating
one
there is a tumblr you're probably
thinking of tinder
tumblr i always get them really confused
tinder and tumblr i just never remember
okay so anyways but you have this so you
could imagine a situation where
you match people for having
conversations and they pick a topic they
want to have a conversation about say
it's abortion but then they have to tell
you a bunch of other things about
themselves i'm like are they married do
they have kids you know where you know
where did they grow up what religion are
they i don't know something like that
and then what you do is you like
randomly match people by finding
characteristics they match on
but not on the thing that they want to
talk about
so what you have is you have this
capacity to have a conversation where
you can
join with someone and find similarity
with them
um
and
on on a bunch of characteristics
but not the characteristic that you're
going to debate about now why would you
do that you would do that because first
of all
we're social animals and when we like
each other and we trust each other
even when we're disagreeing with each
other
we synchronize our heart rate
synchronize our breathing synchronize it
actually makes body budgeting so much
easier and so
subjectively or just like in terms of um
you know um common sense you'd say well
of course if i'm talking to someone
who's really similar to me and we
disagree on one thing but we can find
you know agreement on these other things
it's going to be easier to talk about
that um one thing yeah why is it easier
it's easier because under the hood
there's all kinds of you know collective
body budgeting going on there that um
that that you're not really aware of
your your brains are coordinating in a
way that you're not really aware of and
that may sound like airy fairy gauzy
mystical but it's actually real
and
i think that
you know
so i just think that knowing having
these little tidbits with you
it just fills your toolbox with
um more tools
um
it's not just about having concepts like
in everyday life it's also about knowing
how to use those concepts right and
um
i think that's what these conversations
are really about
and that i think is the perfect place to
wrap this up lisa i could talk to you
for hours and hours and hours i hope
that we get a chance to do this again
your work is profound to me it's shaping
the way that i think about the brain and
how to manage my own life and
i really hope that people get out of
this exactly what you're hoping they
will because more tools in the toolkit
seems like the perfect answer
thank you so much for coming on guys if
you haven't read our books read them
they are extraordinary
they will influence how you think about
yourself and your own internal life and
thinking of things that will influence
how you think about your internal life
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe here and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
[Music]
you